Dear Sabit,

I noticed your SprintLab software, and it looks awesome. Very impressive work, and kudos to you for providing it free. This is a great initiative to allow more people to get access to biomechanical analyses. I wanted to share one idea for your further development of the software. Sorry if this is something that you have already considered.

It appears that in the software, the user performs simple calibration by marking the horizontal plane and a known distance to convert pixels to real-world units. However, camera lens distortion makes the conversion inaccurate. Performing full lens distortion correction would be too complicated for the user, but you could implement a simpler version of this. By instructing the user to place objects, say every 1 or 2 meters, along the line of movement, and then digitizing the location of those objects/markers, you could perform a correction that would be valid in the plane of movement. This correction would be a simple second-order polynomial fitted between the known locations and pixel coordinates along the line of movement.

So, in practice, I suggest that the user would place objects in known locations along the line of movement (i.e., on the track/line that the athlete will run). Then, the user would collect a short calibration video clip to correct pixel-based information in subsequent clips, while keeping the camera in the same location. From the calibration clip, the user would need to define the line of movement (i.e., would give you information to correct the horizontal plane/level) and mark those known locations + add information where those marks are (e.g., 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 m). Your software would then, in the post-processing phase, correct the COM kinematics (location, speed, acceleration) for the non-horizontal camera alignment (not needed if you can assume that the camera has been positioned level) and camera lens distortion. This would allow you to get more accurate COM-related outcomes. I would probably go without the lens distortion correction for the joint angles since 1) full distortion correction would be too complicated, 2) distortion-related errors are smaller than tracking errors, or the fact that movement is 3D and analysis is in 2D.

If you would implement this correction, you could also consider implementing COM kinematics -based modelling or horizontal kinetics (i.e., so-called force-velocity profiling). The method is based on F=MA. It is known that COM acceleration in maximal spring will follow a predictable pattern (exponential function), and by estimating the contribution of air resistance, one can estimate the horizontal ground reaction forces. The method has been validated against force plates, and we have further made small adjustments to the methods for removing the need for accurate detection of the instant of sprint start. This would allow the analysis to be run fully automatically in the background. The user would just need to add the mass and height of the athlete. The analysis will yield estimates of maximal horizontal force production, peak power, decay of horizontal force production as a function of distance, an estimate of maximal obtainable speed, etc. The analysis is more reliable if performed over a bit longer distance, e.g., 30 meters, which then requires using a quite wide lens and hence necessitates the mentioned lens correction. More information is here: https://erepo.uef.fi/items/16223fea-16cf-4ecd-8774-4d8f623e2c29

All the best,
Lauri